boy what a difference it makes when I
stand up straight the last video was I
was hunched over the government's go I
look a lot better so that's great so
guys I'm starting this videos by noting
if you started watching my channel
recently you think of me as someone who
studies Chinese as the t-shirt indicates
but actually back in my brilliant
focused hard-working heyday as a young
man back when my energies were not so
dissipated but I didn't have such
relaxed lifestyle
I studied the ancient Indian language
pally
so my lifestyles changed in a lot of
ways I'm now 40 years old I have a five
year old daughter I have a 26 year old
girlfriend who needs a lot of attention
she's just a tough campaign but there
was a time when I was younger and much
more mentally focused in self-discipline
and was over the real jerk - I was
really hard to get along with it was
always saying to people I'm not on
vacation don't waste my time I've got to
get back to the Buddhist monastery I've
got to get back to the library I gotta
go back to the archives
I've got to get back to the gym did
workout back then - but I studied the
most ancient language of the Buddhist
tradition so it occurred to me right
after making the prior video talking
about the nature of philosophy in the
Western world to do a video type with
the nature of philosophy in Buddhism and
thus in a large part of Asia and I do
now have expertise in Chinese and
Japanese but my original area of
expertise in Buddhism was ancient India
Sri Lanka and then the transition from
Sri Lanka to Thailand Laos Cambodia
Myanmar etc so ancient tera vaada
Buddhism but really all of the forms of
what is in the follow after that
although you know like everyone else
I have relatively little interest in
forms of Buddhism that are relatively
corrupt and far removed from the
original philosophy there is that
keyword that that started the whole
thing rolling so the question in the
titleist video is is Buddhism a
philosophy was Buddhism ever a
philosophy and it's significant to note
that from an early period in the
European appraisal there has been an
interest in instead interpreting
Buddhism as an anti philosophy
interpreting Buddhism as a kind of
nihilistic antique read or anti religion
and this is sometimes done quite
sincerely and sometimes with less
sincerity I would say this got popular
first in the French language it would be
interesting to look at in Europe where
this idea picked up first but I can
remember from the earliest period of the
European interest in Buddhism probably
because at that time France was so
Christian and the French imperialist
encounter with Buddhism was so different
from the British imperialist encounter
there was a lot of interest in looking
at Buddhism not just as an antidote to
Christianity but as some kind of
nihilistic or skeptical antidote to
religion in general in the English
language I would say this only really
became popular in like the 1970s when
the philosophy of Naggar Jinnah became
very popular some people prefer to
pronounce that name Nagarjuna whatever
knock yourself out I mean how we
pronounce Sanskrit in 21st century
English a little bit flexible on these
questions
anyway Naggar Jinnah is not is not the
Buddha in the garden is a later Buddhist
philosopher but he became a kind of
turning point in the Western reappraisal
of early Buddhist philosophy as a
negative critique of the religions that
were older than Buddhism now if you just
look at it to that limited extent there
are two negative contrasts you are going
to talk about in adam braiding the sense
in which buddhism is and isn't a
philosophy one is the extent to which
buddhism was proposed to challenge and
negate the philosophies that came before
it in ancient india and we normally
refer to those religions as hinduism and
Jainism but they were significantly
different from Hinduism as it exists
today in India significantly different
from Jainism as exist in India also so
it was ancient but it was season one
Buddhism against season one Hinduism it
was a very different theater of debate
but we do have a lot of evidence of
exactly what the debates
were and the fact that it did indeed
challenge and then the second contrast
is the extent to which Buddhism has
emerged into modern Western
consciousness or even even modern Asia
Asian consciously west and east into a
modern appraisal as a challenge to
religions like Christianity and Judaism
though and Islam sure throw that in too
so Buddhism as a philosophy in this
context gets a lot of credit for what it
rejects for what it expresses skepticism
about for what expresses doubt about in
the sophisticated way in which it
challenges the assumptions of its
interlocutors the way in which it
challenges the assumptions of Christians
and ancient Hindus in these these two
contexts so the best-known example of
this in the example that has the most
pages devoted to it in the Pali Canon so
the Pali Canon is the most ancient and
most important corpus of Buddhist texts
is about the existence or nonexistence
of the soul and please don't send me
email on this the word soul is a correct
translation into English it is not about
the existence of the self it's not about
the bodily self it's about the existence
of the soul it's not about the
psychological personality it's about you
have a soul that really is what's being
debated there and it really seems that
pretty much everyone in ancient India
with the exception of people who are
complete atheists complete nihilist who
rejected religion entirely pretty much
everyone seemed to agree that there was
something called the soul and the head
debates about the nature of the soul and
where it came from where when after you
died there's one theory and a mmm I've
had connections with the scholars who
are interested in this there's one
theory that the most ancient idea of the
soul in India was actually linked the
idea of the rain cycle that when you
died your soul evaporated up into the
heavens and rain down again so just as
in ancient Greece there was a kind of
speculative diversity of views about
spirits and souls and even indeed
cosmology and questions of where does
rain come from that there were different
kind of supernatural approaches
competing and the Buddhists come in at
the hard skeptical or Nile
and of this saying no there's absolutely
no soul at all and moreover they think
that there's this fundamental jarring
improvement in your life if only you can
deeply and profoundly appreciate that
there really is no soul if you'll give
up this this delusion so this is one
flattering example now you can also look
at any kind of specific religious
austerity that the Buddhists were
opposed to for example the idea that
starving yourself to death brought about
enlightenment that that fasting brought
about enlightenment the Buddhists are
opposed to that the idea that throwing
yourself into freezing cold water like
in a ritual way repeatedly brought about
enlightenment of spiritual attainment so
you get very caddy sort of Buddhist
debates about that like well if you
think throwing yourself into freezing
cold water makes you profound or
philosophically advances you you ought
to get down on your knees and worship
the fish that are swimming in this is
this cold pond right now they're much
more likely than you or I you know this
this kind of thing what's the
significance of taking a vow of silence
what's the significance of starving
yourself to death there are a lot of
specific oh oh sorry and a huge one
what's the significance of the Vedas the
ancient religious texts of Hinduism and
the Buddhists just think it's nonsense
the magical book that many other people
in India not all are worshipping as they
were equivalent to the Bible the
Buddhists think that has no no
significance at all so it's easy to
cherry-pick it's easy to selectively
quote these most critical passages of
Buddhism this what a lot of people want
to do and then present Buddhism as a
nihilistic anti philosophy as a
liberating skeptical ethic of
cross-examining your opponents and
revealing the truth now this is itself
however completely fictional because
what you're doing is only looking at
what we're looking at less than 1/2 of
what the religion is Buddhism ancient
Buddhism in the ancient world absolutely
was based on hallucinogenic experiences
of Sir I shouldn't say hallucinations
purely hallucinogenic hallucinations
period and of have hallucinating and
seeing all kinds of things including
gods with a lowercase G
Yeti's and demons and the the ghosts of
deceased people and the fate of what
happens to the ghosts of those dispute
disease people after they die and that
they go through a kind of magical
process of reincarnation and other
spirit realms and so on so all of that
is fundamentally dogmatic and magical
and it's only by focusing on one half of
the equation that Europeans and also
modern people in Asia tried to
rehabilitate Buddhism by focusing on its
most skeptical aspects even though those
aspects are there now even if we just
stuck to say say two issues within
ancient Buddhism the soul ie the fact
that ancient Buddhism projected the soul
and the concept of fate the concept of
the gods controlling your your fate
Buddhism also rejects that the idea of
the gods determining what's your any any
kind of fixed fate destiny no the school
would put the issue of destiny if you
just think about those two issues you
already have two really big wedge issues
that make Buddhism seem very enlightened
and modern compared to Christianity now
let's bring this back down to earth for
a second here how about sex is recently
as the 1960s but even more so in the
1860s you could have traveled to
Thailand and said well everyone here is
kind of fundamentally down-to-earth and
relaxed about sex that relaxed about
homosexuality they're relaxed about
transgender process dressing people they
don't seem to have the attitudes towards
virginity and marriage that we have in
the Western world compared to what was
normal in Judaism Christianity and Islam
the types of social customs and
attitudes towards sex that had emerged
out of Buddhism on the one hand it did
valorize monks living in total celibacy
there's kind of a very simple division
between on the one hand there's the life
of celibacy on the other hand there's
this life of sexual freedom of lay
people
it's like monks completely reject using
money they're not supposed to even touch
money but if you're a layperson fine go
out and earn as much money as you want
to the similar kind of
black and white difference between the
monastic life which is totally virtuous
world world rejecting and then there's
the worldly realm life affirming and you
know it's not quite it's not quite
no-holds-barred it's not quite you know
a free-for-all but much much more
permissive again even in the 1960s
little in the 1860s
then what Europeans were saddled with so
again there's this tendency to want to
interpret Buddhism as a kind of
liberating nihilistic ethic as an anti
philosophy and an anti religion as
removing chains so again my point isn't
that this is totally false or totally
you can see why people got excited
people were really optimistic but this
is less than half of the whole story
just as when people stand up and say
about the American Constitution and the
formation in the United States America
this is some great liberating thing
about the whole world you can kind of
put your hand up and say what about the
slaves and the native people like what
about and did you speak what's like what
about slavery and genocide to put that
but there are some big gaps in you know
the good news about the American
Constitution it doesn't mean there's
nothing to be excited about or nothing
to appreciate in America Constitution
but there are some really big questions
left here and with Buddhism I mean just
the issue of slavery the issue of
imperialism and kingship the issue of
government the issue of what kind of
government was associated with and
promoted by Buddhism and I mean again
most Buddhist scholars are still shocked
when I even mentioned slavery well guess
what guys this was a huge part of the
religion right up till the day before
yesterday there's a lot that's being
swept under the rug there um you know in
Southeast Asia especially it's true also
that Buddhism was very positively
related to literacy as such so it kind
of gets a bit of a it gets a lot of good
press gets a free ride that way which is
it's a very positive thing Buddhism was
really the source of written language in
Southeast Asia and it provided literacy
it taught literacy to both you know men
and women so I give credit for that and
I could get into even the title goes how
literacy was spread to people through
Buddhist monks Buddhist monks were
really the only teachers doing
professional teachers professional
educators in a society that was really
totally illiterate before tera vaada
bosom arrived there and Buddhist temples
even in Laos even in the mountains of
Laos they became engines of literacy and
warehouses of common literature and is a
lot pause the you know that
however these societies did not progress
scientifically they didn't I mean and we
don't even have to say compared to
England and France they did not progress
scientifically even compared to China or
Japan or India of it never even really
caught up with India they never built
the pyramids they never caught up with
ancient Egypt they never accomplished
anything on that scale they very
fundamentally remained mired in a kind
of worse than feudal ignorance and why
is that well again obviously I'm not
saying that that Buddhism alone should
be criticized this way
of most people who are sincerely engaged
in the study of the history of Islam
they look at the dark ages that Islam
brought about as this terrible
regression if you just look at ancient
Athens the pagan period of ancient
Athens compared to the Dark Ages once
Catholicism takes over you see a kind of
regression there also many religions
have kind of blotted out the human
capacity for innovation imagination
learning etc etc but with those
religions with Islam and Catholicism
it's kind of easy to point to repression
as the problem and with Tera Byte of
buddhism really just want to talk about
terrible isms at this moment so I think
this is true well this would also be
true of many other forms of Buddhism but
let's just say with tera vaada Buddhism
it's not so much that you see repression
that's there of in the sense of Islam
brutally conquering a country forcing
all of the men to be circumcised as
adults smashing their idols burning down
their temples stealing all the gold from
the temples and then forcibly
assimilating everyone and cultural
genocide on a massive scale this is how
Islam conquered a large part of the
world it's not that what's disturbing
the lesson we have to take from the lack
of progress input of societies is just
fundamentally satisfying the myth of
reincarnation as to people that a great
deal of the edge death loses its sting
and life loses its lash and it's
motivation when you see yourself not as
an individual living one life who's got
to accomplish something now it's now or
never
you're gonna die you never come back you
got one life you're in and you're out as
opposed to oh no no it's a cycle of
suffering it's a cycle of reincarnation
of lives that come and go again and
again over thousands and thousands of
years hundreds of thousands millions of
years this is a cycle that goes on
almost forever my one of my professors
have autism you say it's it's infinity
minus one you know the cycle of riyals
but you've been reincarnated in it
warrants times Newton in the innumerable
times before and you will be
reincarnated numeral times again and
this may motivate certain kinds of
suicidal and self-destructive virtue it
may make people more willing to
sacrifice their lives and it also
demotivates certain kinds of
accomplishment certain times of world
changing and life changing paradigm
challenging activities in in one's life
so I closed this video by saying I am
now 40 years old and I'm trying to plan
what I'm gonna do between age 40 and age
60 I'm never gonna be 40 years old again
the mental intellectual creative
potential I've got now I don't think I'm
gonna have it at 60 maybe no wrong maybe
I'm gonna go be a Renaissance man at 60
and 70 I don't know but there's no doubt
the kind of motivation I felt many times
when I was thinking I might only have a
few years to live I've got to live now
gotta do this now the intense focus and
work ethic I have I think that can
emerge out of nihilism or atheism or
maybe if refuse of the world but there
is something mentally deadening about
spirituality put it that broadly when
people think they're not living for
today they're not living for now they're
not living for the next 20 years you're
living for an eternity in paradise in
Christianity those
or you're living for an almost eternal
cycle of reincarnation I think this
really has a tremendously deadening
impact on the human spirit it Rob's
death of its sting but mmm yeah it may
also rob life of its savor Buddhism a
mix of dogma philosophy and anti
philosophy I will put the link to my
buddhism playlist at the bottom of this
video
shout out to the one supporter on
patreon one who asked me to make more
videos but put his philosophy